tonight I want to have a conversation
about this incredible global issue
that's at the intersection of land use
food and environments something we can
all relate to and what I've been calling
the other Inconvenient Truth but first I
want to take you on a little journey
let's first visit our planet but at
night and from space this is what our
planet looks like from outer space at
nighttime if you are going to take a
satellite and travel around the planet
and the thing you would notice first of
course is how dominant the human
presence on our planet is we see cities
we see oil fields you can even make out
fishing fleets in the see that we are
dominating much of our planet and mostly
through the use of energy that we see
here at night but let's go back and drop
it a little deeper and look during the
daytime what we see during the day is
our landscapes this is part of the
Amazon basin the place called rondônia
in the south center part of the
Brazilian Amazon if you look really
carefully in the upper right hand corner
you're going to see a thin white line
which is a road that was built in the
1970s if we come back to the same place
in 2001 what we're going to find is that
these roads spurt off more roads and
more roads after that at the end of
which is a small clearing in the
rainforest where they're going to be a
few cows these cows are used for beef
we're going to eat these cows and these
cows are eaten basically in South
America in Brazil and Argentina they're
not being shipped up here but this kind
of fishbone pattern of deforestation is
something we notice a lot of around the
tropics especially in this part of the
world if we go a little bit further
south in our little tour of the world we
can go to the Bolivian edge of the
Amazon here also in 1975 and if you look
really carefully there's a thin white
line through that kind of scene and
there's a lone farmer out there in the
middle of the primeval jungle
let's come back again a few years later
here in 2003 and we'll see that that
landscape actually looks a lot more
alike
Iowa than it does like a rain forest in
fact what you're seeing here are
sleeping fields these soybeans are being
shipped to Europe and to China as animal
feed especially after the mad cow
disease scare about a decade ago where
we don't want to feed animals animal
protein anymore because that can
transmit disease instead we want to feed
them more vegetable proteins so soybeans
have really exploded showing how trade
and globalization are you know really
responsible for the connections to
rainforest in the Amazon incredibly
strange and interconnected world that we
have today well again and again what we
find is we look around the world in our
little tour of the world is that
landscape after landscape after
landscape have been cleared and altered
for growing food and other crops so one
of the questions we've been asking is
how much of the world is used to grow
food and how where is it exactly and how
can we change that into the future and
what does it mean well our team has been
looking at this in a global scale using
satellite data and ground-based data can
it attract farming at a global scale and
this is what we found and it's startling
this map shows the presence of
agriculture on planet Earth
the green areas are though areas we use
to grow crops like wheat or soybeans or
corn or rice or whatever that's 16
million square kilometers worth of land
if you put it all together in one place
would be the size of South America
the second area in brown is the world's
pastures and rangelands where our
animals live that areas about 30 million
square kilometers or about an Africa's
worth of land a huge amount of land and
it's the best land of course is what you
see the what's left is like the middle
of the Sahara Desert or Siberia or the
middle of a rainforest we're using a
planet's worth of land already if we
look at this carefully we find it's
about 40% of the Earth's land surface is
devoted to agriculture and it's 60 times
larger than all the areas we complain
about our suburban sprawl in our cities
where we mostly live half of humanity
lives in cities today but it's 60 times
larger area is used to grow food
so this
an amazing kind of result it really
shocked us when we looked at that so
we're using an enormous amount of land
for agriculture but also we're using a
lot of water this is a photograph flying
into Arizona and when you look at it
you're like what are they growing here
it turns out they're growing lettuce in
the middle of the desert using water
sprayed on top now the irony is that's
probably sold in our supermarket shelves
in the Twin Cities but what's really
interesting is this waters got to come
from someplace it comes from here the
Colorado River in North America well a
Colorado and a typical day in the 1950s
this is just in a not a flood not a
drought kind of an average today looks
something like this but if we come back
today during a normal condition to the
exact same location this is what's left
the difference is mainly irrigating the
desert for food or maybe golf courses in
Scottsdale you take your pick
well this is a lot of water and again
we're mining water and using it to grow
food and today if you travel down
further down the Colorado it dries up
completely and no longer flows into the
ocean we've literally consumed an entire
River in North America for irrigation
well that's not even the worst example
in the world this probably is the Aral
Sea now a lot of people remember this
from your geography classes this is in
the former Soviet Union between
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan one of the
great inland seas the world where
there's kind of a paradox here because
it looks like it's surrounded by desert
why is the sea here the reason it's here
is because in the right hand side you
see two little rivers kind of coming
down through the sand feeding this Basin
with water those rivers are draining
snowmelt from mountains far to the east
for snow melts it travels down the river
through the desert and forms the great
arrow see well in the 1950s the Soviets
decided to divert that water to irrigate
the desert to grow cotton believe it or
not in Kazakhstan to sell cotton to the
international markets to bring foreign
currency into the Soviet Union they
really needed the money well you can
imagine what happens you turn off the
water supply to the air we'll see what's
going to happen here it is in 1973 1986
2004 and about 11 months ago it's pretty
extraordinary now a lot of us in the
audience here live in the Midwest
imagine that was Lake Superior imagine
that was Lake Huron
it's extraordinary change this is not
only change in water and where the
shoreline is is a change in the
fundamentals of the environment of this
region let's start with this the Soviet
Union didn't really have a Sierra Club
let's put it that way so what you're
find in the bottom of the air will see
ain't pretty there's a lot of toxic
waste a lot of things were dumped there
they're now becoming airborne one of
those small islands that was remote and
impossible to get to as a site of Soviet
biological weapons testing you can walk
there today weather patterns that's
change 19 of the unique 20 fish species
found only in the Aral Sea are now wiped
off the face of the earth this is an
environmental disaster writ large but
let's bring it home this is a picture
that Al Gore gave me a few years ago
that he took when he was in the Soviet
Union a long long time ago showing the
fishing fleets of the Aral Sea you see
the canal they dug they're so desperate
to try to kind of float the boats into
the remaining pools of water but they
finally had to give up because the piers
and warning simply couldn't keep up with
a retreating shoreline I don't know
about you but I'm terrified that future
archaeologists will dig this up and
write stories about our time in history
and wonder what were you thinking well
that's the future we have to look
forward to we already use about 50% of
the Earth's fresh water that's
sustainable and agriculture alone is 70%
of that so we use a lot of water a lot
of land for agriculture we also use a
lot of the atmosphere for agriculture
usually we take think about the
atmosphere we think about climate change
and greenhouse gases and mostly around
energy but it turns out agriculture is
one of the biggest emitters of
greenhouse gases - if you look at carbon
dioxide from burning tropical rainforest
or methane coming from cows and rice or
nitrous oxide from too many fertilizers
it turns out Agriculture's 30 percent of
the greenhouse gases going into the
atmosphere from human activity that's
more than all our transport
it's more than all our electricity it's
more than all other manufacturing in
fact it's the single largest emitter of
greenhouse gases of any human activity
in the world and yet we don't talk about
it very much so we have this incredible
presence today of agriculture dominating
our planet whether it's 40 percent of
our land surface 70 percent of the water
we use 30 percent of our greenhouse gas
emissions we've doubled the flows of
nitrogen and phosphorus around the world
simply by using fertilizers causing huge
problems of water quality from rivers
lakes and even oceans and it's also the
single biggest driver biodiversity loss
so without a doubt agriculture is the
single most powerful force unleashed on
this planet since the end of the Ice Age
no question and it rivals climate change
in importance and they're both happening
at the same time
but what's really important here to
remember is that it's not all bad it's
not that agriculture is a bad thing in
fact we completely depend on it it's not
optional it's not a luxury it's an
absolute necessity we have to provide
food and feed and yeah fiber and even
biofuels
- something like 7 billion people in the
world today and if anything we're going
to have the demands on agriculture
increase into the future it's not going
to go away it's going to get a lot
bigger mainly because of growing
population we're seven billion people
today heading towards at least nine
probably nine and a half before we're
done more importantly changing diets as
the world becomes wealthier as well as
more populous we're seeing increases in
dietary consumption of meat which take a
lot more resources than a vegetarian
diet does so more people eating more
stuff and richer stuff and of course
having energy crisis at the same time
where we have to replace oil with other
energy sources that will ultimately have
to include some kinds of biofuels and
bioenergy sources so you put these
together it's really hard to see how
we're going to get to the rest of the
century without at least doubling global
agricultural production well how are we
going to do this how are we going to
double global AG production around the
world well we could try to farm more
land
analysis we've done where on the left is
where the crops are today on the right
is where they could be based on soils
and climate assuming climate change
doesn't disrupt too much of this which
is not a good assumption we could farm
more land but the problem is the
remaining lands are in sensitive areas
they have a lot of biodiversity a lot of
carbon things we want to protect so we
could grow more food by expanding
farmland but we better not because it's
ecologically very very dangerous thing
to do instead we maybe want to freeze
the footprint of agriculture and farm
the lands we have better this is work
that we're doing to try to highlight
places in the world where we could
improve yields without harming the
environment the green areas here show
where corn yields just showing corn as
an example are already really high
probably the maximum you could find on
earth today for that climate and soil
but the brown areas in yellow areas are
places where we're only getting maybe 20
or 30% of the yield you should be able
to get you see a lot of this in Africa
even Latin America but interestingly
Eastern Europe where Soviet Union and
Eastern Bloc countries used to be is
still a mess agriculturally now this
would require nutrients and water it's
going to either be organic or
conventional or some mix the two to
deliver that plants need water and
nutrients but we can do this and there
are opportunities to make this work but
we have to do it in a way that is
sensitive to meeting the food security
needs of the future and the
environmental security needs the future
we have to figure out how to make this
trade-off between growing food and
having healthy environment work better
right now it's kind of an all-or-nothing
proposition we can grow food in the
background that's a soybean field and in
this flower diagram it shows we grow a
lot of food but we don't have a lot of
clean water we're not storing a lot of
carbon we don't have a lot of
biodiversity in the foreground we have
this Prairie that's wonderful from the
environmental side but you can't eat
anything what's there to eat we need to
figure out how to blink both of those
together into a new kind of Agriculture
that brings them all together now when I
talk about this people often tell me
well isn't Blanc the answer organic food
food GMOs new trade subsidies new farm
bills and yeah we have a lot of good
ideas here but not any one of these is a
silver bullet in fact what I think they
are is more like silver buckshot and I
love silver buckshot you put it together
and you've got something really powerful
but we need to put them together so what
we have to do I think is invent a new
kind of Agriculture that blends the best
ideas of commercial agriculture in the
green revolution with the best ideas of
organic farming and local food and the
best ideas of environmental conservation
not to have them fighting each other but
to have them collaborating together to
form a new kind of Agriculture something
I call Terra culture or farming for a
whole planet now having this kind of
conversation has been really hard and
we've been trying very hard to bring
these key points to people to reduce the
controversy to increase the
collaboration and I'm going to show you
a short video that does kind of show our
efforts right now to bring these science
together into a single conversation so
let me show you that
you
is that we face one of the greatest
grand challenges in all of human history
today the need to feed 9 billion people
and do so sustainably and equitably and
justly at the same time protecting our
planet for this and future generations
this is going to be one of the hardest
things we ever have done in human
history and we absolutely have to get it
right and we have to get it right on our
first and only try so thanks very much
thank you very